Announcer: FROM ABC NEWS,
AROUND THE WORLD AND
INTO YOUR HOME, THE STORIES THAT
TOUCH YOUR LIFE, WITH HUGH DOWNS
AND BARBARA WALTERS.
THIS IS "20/20."
GOOD EVENING AND WELCOME
TO "20/20 WEDNESDAY."
MORE THAN 8,000 OF THIS
COUNTRY'S CHILDREN ARE BEHIND
BARS TONIGHT SENTENCED
AS ADULTS, PART OF A GROWING
TREND TO GET TOUGH ON YOUTHFUL
OFFENDERS.
THEY'RE INCARCERATED NOT
IN JUVENILE DETENTION CENTERS
BUT MAXIMUM SECURITY PRISONS.
MANY WILL RECEIVE VERY LITTLE
REHABILITATIVE COUNSELING.
MANY WITH MENTAL PROBLEMS WILL
BE LEFT UNTREATED.
TONIGHT, WE'RE GOING TO TAKE
YOU TO A PRISON WHERE SOME
OF THE MOST DANGEROUS CHILDREN
ARE HOUSED.
OVER THE PAST TWO YEARS,
WE'VE MADE SEVERAL TRIPS INSIDE
THE CLOSED AND SECRET WORLD
OF A PRISON IN MORGANTON, NORTH
CAROLINA, WHERE ABOUT 800 KIDS
ARE IMPRISONED.
THEY ARE SERVING SENTENCES
FROM SEVERAL MONTHS TO LIFE.
THEY GAVE US EXTRAORDINARY
ACCESS, AND IT WAS HERE THAT
WE FOUND FOUR NEW INMATES WHO
ALLOWED US TO FOLLOW THEM AROUND
AND SHOW YOU WHAT IT'S LIKE
TO BE A NEW KID IN A PLACE WHERE
THE TOUGH EXPLOIT THE WEAK
AND FEAR IS IN THE AIR.
Reporter: EVERY WEDNESDAY
ANOTHER BUSLOAD OF CHILDREN
ARRIVE.
KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT.
WHEN YOUR NAME IS CALLED, COME
OUT AND LINE UP ON THE DOCK.
Reporter: TODAY THERE ARE
15 NEW PRISONERS, "NEW JACKS,"
AS THE OTHER INMATES CALL THEM.
YOU BANGING.
Reporter: THEY ARE
STRIP-SEARCHED, WEIGHED
AND INSPECTED AND CATALOGED
BY THEIR SCARS AND TATTOOS.
HE'S GOTTA TOOS ON BOTH LEGS.
Reporter: THEY SAY
THE PROCESS FEELS SO DEMEANING,
BUT WHAT MOST OF THE NEW JACKS
DON'T REALIZE IS THIS IS
THE EASY PART.
DROP EVERYTHING DOWN IN
THERE.
YOU KNOW THE ROUTINE.
Reporter: IN THE DAYS AHEAD,
THE TOUGHEST VICTIMIZERS AMONG
THEM WILL LEARN WHAT IT IS LIKE
TO BE AFRAID.
WAITING FOR THEM BEHIND THESE
LOCKED DOORS ARE 800 SEASONED
PRISONERS WHO WILL MAKE EACH DAY
A TEST.
IF YOU AIN'T READY TO DIE
OR READY TO KILL, THEN DON'T [
BLEEP ] COME [ BLEEP ] WITH ME.
Reporter: ALL CAME HERE
AS TEENAGE BOYS, MOST
OF THE CRIMES THEY COMMITTED
WERE TERRIFYING.
Reporter: BUT EVEN THE
TOUGHEST KIDS IN THE STREET FIND
IN PRISON THEY'RE NOT TOUGH
ENOUGH.
THIS IS ANOTHER [ BLEEP ]
WORLD.
EVEN THOUGH IT'S IN THE UNITED
STATES, IT'S A WHOLE ANOTHER
WORLD.
WHAT SIZE SHOE DO YOU WEAR.
Reporter: ONE OF THE NEW
JACKS IS WONDERING THROUGH THE
PROCESS IN A DAYS.
ALONG THAT WALL --
Reporter: HIS NAME IS
OWEN FRANCIS.
HE'S 16.
AND HE'S NEVER BEEN TO PRISON
BEFORE.
HE WAS CONVICTED OF PULLING THE
TRIGGER IN A DRIVE-BY SHOOTING.
THOUGH HE SAYS HE DIDN'T DO IT.
HE WAS SET UP BY A FRIEND.
IF YOU NEED TO USE THE
RESTROOM, GO AHEAD.
ARE YOU ALL READY?
YES.
Reporter: NOW HE'S ALONE IN
THIS FOREIGN LAND WITH ITS
DANGERS AND CODES.
HE'S THINKING OF HOME, HIS
MOTHER.
SHE WAS DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER
NOT TOO LONG AGO, ABOUT A MONTH.
TOLD HER I'D BE OUT BEFORE
SHE KNEW IT.
Reporter: ANOTHER NEW JACK,
MICHAEL LEGGETT, HE'S BACK
TO PRISON FOR A THIRD TIME.
WHEN YOU GET OUT THERE, PUT
YOUR BELT ON AND HAVE A SEAT ON
THE FLOOR.
Reporter: AT THE BEGINNING OF
THE DAY, HE'S TALKING TOUGH,
SAYING HE USED TO BEAT UP NEW
JACKS AND WILL DO IT AGAIN, EVEN
A FRIEND.
HE'S HISTORY.
EVEN IF YOU LIKE HIM?
THERE AIN'T NOTHING I CAN DO.
LIFE'S A BITCH AND THEN YOU DIE.
Reporter: THIS IS JAMES YOUNG
ANOTHER NEW JACK, 17 YEARS OLD
WHO SAYS HE WANTS TO GO
STRAIGHT.
HE'S BEEN IN AND OUT OF JUVENILE
DETENTION CENTERS AND TRAINING
CAMPS SINCE HE WAS 10.
I PROBABLY BEEN
IN 25 DIFFERENT PLACES.
NONE OF THEM HAVE HELPED.
I MEAN, IF ANYTHING,
THEY PROBABLY TAUGHT ME,
YOU KNOW, HOW TO BE A BETTER
CRIMINAL.
Reporter: THIS IS YOUNG'S
FIRST TIME BEING INCARCERATED
AS AN ADULT.
IT'S HOTTER THAN HELL.
Reporter: AS THEY ARE TAKEN
TO THEIR FLOOR, THE OTHER
PRISONERS ARE ALREADY SIZING
THEM UP, WATCHING HOW THEY REACT
TO THEIR STARES.
IT'S CALLED "SCREWFACE" OR "THE
LOOK."
THEN I JUST LOOK AT YOU LIKE
THAT.
AND SEE IF YOU'RE GOING TO CUT
YOUR EYES.
SEE IF YOU'RE GOING TO PUT
YOUR HEAD DOWN OR TURN YOUR HEAD
THE OTHER WAY.
IT'S A SIGN OF WEAKNESS.
I THOUGHT IF I LOOKED AWAY,
IT WOULD MAKE ME LOOK LIKE
I WASN'T, YOU KNOW, I WAS LIKE
A WUSS OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
SO I JUST STARE 'EM BACK.
NEXT TWO WEEKS IS GOING TO BE
HELL.
CODE FOUR.
MAJOR CONFRONTATION BETWEEN
TWO INMATES, PROBABLY GANG
RELATED.
Reporter: A BLEEDING INMATE
IS TAKEN OUT IN A WHEELCHAIR, A
NEW JACK'S FIRST LESSON, FIGHTS
CAN ERUPT ANYWHERE AND ANYONE
CAN BE THE TARGET.
I SEE A FIGHT AT LEAST EVERY
DAY OUT HERE.
THEY MAY HAVE TO FEND FOR
THEIR LIFE, LITERALLY.
A LOT OF PEOPLE LIKE TO SNEAK
UP ON YOU.
Reporter: PRISON OFFICIALS
SAY THEY DO EVERYTHING THEY CAN
TO PROTECT INMATES, BUT IN SOME
AREAS, THERE ARE ONLY TWO
OFFICERS FOR AS MANY AS 72
INMATES.
A FEW PRISONERS MAY START TO
PLAY FIGHT, TO DIVERT ATTENTION
FROM THE REAL ACTION.
OR IN THE WEIGHT ROOM, A WHOLE
GANG OF PEOPLE MAY SURROUND
THEIR VICTIM.
COME OVER AND HIT YOU IN THE
HEAD.
Reporter: AND IN THE
ELEVATOR.
IF YOU GET ON THE ELEVATOR
AND YOU SAY,
COVER THE CAMERA.
EVERYBODY KNOW WHAT YOU MEAN.
EVERYBODY KNOW, OH, SOMEBODY
ABOUT TO FIGHT.
I GOT JUMPED.
THEY FIGHTING TO BUST
YOUR EYES AND BREAK YOUR JAW.
IF I BEAT SOMEBODY'S
[ BLEEP ]
THEN I SAY, THE [ BLEEP ] IS
DOWN LAYING ON THE [ BLEEP ]
GROUND BLEEDING, YOU KNOW,
CHOKING SO MUCH BLOOD HE CAN'T
EVEN GET UP AND WALK OUT
OF THE DAMN ROOM.
YOU KNOW WHAT I'M SAYING?
Reporter: THE NEXT THING
YOU LEARN HERE IS THAT THERE ARE
ABOUT SEVEN MAJOR GANGS
OPERATING INSIDE WESTERN YOUTH.
THERE ARE COMPLICATED
HIERARCHIES WITH SECRET
LANGUAGES, HAND SIGNALS.
THROW DOWN YOUR HAND, IT MEANS
DISRESPECT TO YOUR ENEMY.
THE SIGNAL OF HIS GANG --
THIS IS WHAT I REPRESENT.
THIS IS WHAT I BANG FOR.
SIX POINT STAR.
THIS IS MY LIFE.
Reporter: GANG MEMBERS LOOK
OUT FOR EACH OTHER, LIKE FAMILY,
BUT TO JOIN, YOU MAY HAVE
TO FIGHT, STEAL OR SELL DRUGS.
WHAT HAPPENS IF YOU DECIDE TO
TURN TO OFFICERS FOR PROTECTION?
THERE'S A SAYING, SNITCHES GET
STITCHES.
I HAVE LIKE ENEMIES OUT THERE
NOW BECAUSE I SNITCHED ON A LOT
OF PEOPLE.
Reporter: CONSIDER THE SOURCE
BUT SEVERAL PRISONERS DID TELL
US THAT THE COs CAN BE AS
VIOLENT AS THE INMATES.
WHILE YOU'RE IN HANDCUFFS,
THEY BEAT YOU DOWN LIKE YOU
AIN'T NOTHING.
PLEASE, GOD, PLEASE, DON'T LET
THEM KILL ME, PLEASE.
HOLLERING AND SCREAMING.
SOME PEOPLE JUST DON'T
REALIZE.
THEY COME HERE 15 YEARS OLD.
THEY THINK THIS IS LIKE TRAINING
SCHOOL.
THIS AIN'T TRAINING SCHOOL.
THIS IS PRISON.
YOU CAN'T COME THROUGH -- CAN'T
GO THROUGH THIS WITHOUT
NO SCARS.
EITHER PHYSICALLY OR MENTALLY.
Reporter: INCLUDING THAT ONE
THING WE ALWAYS HEAR ABOUT,
RAPE.
IS IT HERE LIKE IT IS --
IN ADULT FACILITIES.
Reporter: IT DOES TAKE PLACE.
SHE SAYS IT CAN GET ROUGH.
WHAT PERCENTAGE OF THESE DO YOU
THINK ARE REALLY HARD CORE
VIOLENT KIDS?
ABOUT 70%.
Reporter: BACK IN PROCESSING,
THERE'S ANOTHER NEW JACK NAMED
MARK HALL.
HE'S CALLED TASHA.
HE'S IN FOR STEALING A CAR.
ANTHONY, HALL, MARK.
Reporter: THERE WAS NO
MISTAKING TASHA WHEN HE CAME OFF
THE BUS.
HE'S MARKEDDED AS GAY.
I PUT MYSELF IN THIS
SITUATION, I HAVE TO TAKE
CRITICISM.
AND IT WAS COMING AT ME REALLY
STRONG.
Reporter: WE WERE TOLD GAYS
ARE TARGETED BY THE INMATES WHO
ARE SERVING LONG SENTENCES.
IF I HAD A LIFE SENTENCE, I'M
GONNA -- I'M GONNA GET ME MEAT.
Reporter: IT'S NOW ALMOST
SUNDOWN OF THE FIRST DAY.
YOUR T SHIF SHIRTS, SOCKS,
BOXES.
Reporter: OWEN FRANCIS, WHOSE
MOTHER HAS CANCER, WISHES
THE NIGHT THAT GOT HIM HERE
COULD BE UNDONE.
I WANT TO GO HOME.
Reporter: HE HAS PLENTY OF
TIME NOW FOR REGRET, REGRETS
ABOUT DROPPING OUT OF SCHOOL AND
FALLING IN WITH THE WRONG CROWD
AND HE SAYS, THE FATHER WHO BEAT
HIM AND LEFT HIM THE BITTER
LEGACY OF ABUSE.
NO.
HAVE YOU EVER TOLD ANYONE?
WHO?
MY FRIENDS, PEOPLE I HANG OUT
WITH.
THEY ALL KNOW ABOUT IT.
MY BEST FRIEND, TOMMY.
WELL, IF THE LORD ALLOWS ME
TO LIVE UNTIL I GET OUT OF HERE,
I BELIEVE THAT I'M GONNA GO ON
FORWARD.
AN OFFICIAL AT WESTERN YOUTH
TOLD US PRISONERS CAN FILE
GRIEVANCES.
TO SAY IT DOESN'T HAPPEN, THE
OFFICIALS SAID, WOULD BE A LIE.
BUT WE D
NOW WE'RE GOING TO TAKE
YOU BACK INSIDE, BEHIND
THE PRISON WALLS.
THERE ARE CLASSES AT WESTERN
YOUTH FOR INMATES WHO WANT
TO FINISH HIGH SCHOOL.
AND THERE IS SOME COUNSELING
FOR A RANGE OF PSYCHOLOGICAL
PROBLEMS.
BUT AS WE SAID, IT'S A PLACE
FULL OF SECRET RULES AND CODES
THAT ARE SET BY THE MOST
HARDENED CRIMINALS THERE.
RAISING THE QUESTION, WHAT
HUMANITY WILL BE LEFT WHEN
THE KIDS GET OUT?
Reporter: DAY TWO,
THE ROUTINE BEGINS,
AND AS THE PRISONERS ARE
SHUFFLED FROM ONE PART
OF THE BUILDING TO ANOTHER, ALL
EYES AND EARS ARE ON THE NEW
ARRIVALS.
THE RITES OF INITIATION ARE
ABOUT TO BEGIN.
THEY'LL WAIT TILL LIKE
THEY LEAVE THE FLOOR OR GET
IN THE SHOWER OR LEAVE
THEIR DOOR OPEN.
AND THEN THEY'LL GO UP
IN THEIR ROOM AND TAKE WHAT
THEY GOT, YOU KNOW WHAT I'M
SAYING?
JUST TAKE EVERYTHING.
Reporter: THIS IS THE SINGLE
MOST IMPORTANT POSSESSION
AN INMATE HAS.
IT'S HIS CANTEEN CARD.
IT WORKS LIKE A CREDIT CARD.
EACH ONE WORTH $40 A WEEK.
COME ON.
GIVE ME YOUR CARD.
Reporter: THE RULE HERE IS
THE WEAK GET STRONG-ARMED
AS THEY WAIT IN LINE TO GET
SNEAKERS, SNACKS OR EXTRA FOOD.
HE GONNA GIVE YOU SOMETHING
OUT OF THAT CANTEEN?
YOU KNOW IT, BABY.
IT WOULD BE LIKE, "YO, BUY ME
THIS OR THAT.
YOU GOT ENOUGH TO BUY ME THIS."
THEN IF YOU SAY THAT
YOU CAN'T DO IT OR
NO OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT, THEN
THEY'LL SAY, "WELL, YOU WAIT.
I'M GONNA GET YOU.
I'M GONNA GET YOUR CANTEEN CARD.
I'M GONNA YOKE YOU UP."
YOKE IS CHOKE YOU TO DEATH.
GRAB HIM BY THE THROAT.
CHOKE HIM.
THEY'RE GONNA HAVE TO BREATHE
SOONER OR LATER OR THEY'RE GONNA
DIE.
Reporter: BUT EVEN
IF YOU MANAGE TO GET
THROUGH THE CANTEEN LINE ALL
RIGHT, AS WE SAID BEFORE,
THERE'S THE ELEVATOR.
AS SOON AS THE ELEVATOR DOOR
CLOSE, THEY WILL HIT YOU.
AND ALL OF THEM START BEATING.
Reporter: ON OWEN FRANCIS'
SECOND DAY IN PRISON, HE'S
ALREADY BEEN GIVEN A WARNING.
TODAY I GOT ON THE ELEVATOR.
THERE WAS LIKE SIX DUDES UP
THERE.
AND THEY STARTED FOOLING AROUND
WITH THE CAMERA.
EVERYBODY SAYS IF THEY COVER UP
THE CAMERA, THEY'RE FIXING
TO JUMP YOU.
SO I GOT SCARED WHEN
THEY STARTED MESSING
WITH THE CAMERA.
Reporter: IT WAS JUST A TEST
TO SEE HOW HE'D REACT,
BUT THE EXPERIENCE HAS HIM
SHAKEN.
AND REMEMBER MIKE LEGGETT, WHO
TALKED SO TOUGH ABOUT BEATING UP
NEW JACKS?
BY THE SECOND DAY, HE SEEMED
SCARED TOO.
I'M NERVOUS.
Reporter: AND FULL OF REMORSE
FOR HIS CRIME.
HE TOLD US HE WAS GOING TO TRY
TO AVOID SEEKING THE PROTECTION
OF A GANG.
IT'S A DECISION EVERY NEW JACK
WILL HAVE TO MAKE, WHETHER
HE CAN TOUGH IT OUT ON HIS OWN
OR HAS TO SEEK PROTECTION.
THEY TAKE YOUR CLOTHES?
YOU'RE IN PRISON, MAN.
Reporter: AND COLOR MATTERS.
THE OFFICERS CAME
INTO MY CELL AND TOLD ME THAT
I SHOULD JUST KEEP TO MYSELF
BECAUSE MOST PEOPLE DON'T LIKE
BLOND-HEADED, BLUE-EYED BOYS,
AND THEY USUALLY JUST JUMP
ON YOU.
THEY GET SEXUAL MANNERS.
LIKE WE'RE GONNA GET YOU.
WE'RE GONNA RAPE YOU.
WE'RE GONNA SCREW YOU.
THINGS LIKE THAT.
A WHITE BOY GOT IT TOUGH
IN PRISON.
THEY GOT IT TOUGH.
YOU CAN CALL THAT RACISM
OR WHATEVER YOU WANT.
BUT YOU KNOW BLACKS RUN THIS
PRISON.
I JUST CALL THAT MAJORITY RULES.
Reporter: THE PRISON IS 70%
BLACK.
BUT BLACK OR WHITE, ANYONE CAN
BE A TARGET.
I GOT JUMPED.
IT WAS ME AGAINST EVERYBODY
ELSE.
Reporter: SO WHEN ANOTHER
INMATE OFFERS TO BE THEIR
PROTECTER, MANY NEW JACKS SIGN
ON.
IF ANYBODY ASKS -- THAT'S ALL
THEY NEED TO KNOW.
YOU GET KIND OF SCARED.
THEY TRY TO GET IN
ABOUT WITH SOMEBODY ELSE,
SO THEY BUY HIM STUFF
AND EVERYTHING LIKE THAT.
AND EVERYBODY WILL START CALLING
HIM A JUNE BUG.
Reporter: BUT NOTHING COMES
WITHOUT A PRICE.
JUNE BUGS HAVE TO KICK OUT, GIVE
THEIR PROTECTORS SOMETHING BACK,
USUALLY MONEY OR FOOD.
DAMN, BOY.
YOU AIN'T WANT NOTHING TO EAT
FOR YOURSELF?
YOU DONE SPENT $21.59.
YOU WANT ANYTHING FOR YOURSELF
TO EAT?
THIS WHITE BOY, I DONE SEEN
HIM KICKING OUT $40 A WEEK, HAD
HIS PARENTS SEND THIS OTHER
INMATE MONEY SO THEY WON'T BEAT
HIM UP.
AND MY FRIEND TOLD ME OUT
THERE -- OUT THERE IN SOCIETY,
HE WAS THE BIGGEST
AND THE BADDEST.
BUT WHEN HE COME IN HERE, HE'S
SCARED.
LOOK AT AT THE LIST THIS
[ BLEEP ] GOT.
Reporter: THE CODES GOVERN
THE FOOD LINE AS WELL, WHERE
KITCHEN WORKERS PLAY FAVORITES
BY GIVING FELLOW GANG MEMBERS
AND ALLIES EXTRA PORTIONS WHILE
OTHERS GET SHORT-CHANGED.
IF THEY GET A GRUDGE AGAINST
YOU, YOU AIN'T GOING TO GET THAT
MUCH TO EAT.
THEY CALL IT PUTTING
YOU ON A DIET.
Reporter: A JUNE BUG MAY GET
A SMALLER SHARE AND HAVE TO GIVE
HIS PROTECTOR SOME OF THAT.
ONE OFFICER TURNS A BLIND EYE
WHILE AN INMATE HANDS SOMETHING
FROM HIS FOOD TRAY TO ANOTHER
INMATE AS HE MAKES HIS WAY BACK
TO HIS CELL.
IT TURNS OUT THE INMATE
IN THE CELL HAD BEEN GIVEN FOOD
BY SEVERAL OTHERS AS WELL
AND AGAIN AT DINNER WE CHECKED
AND THE SAME INMATE HAD TWO
TRAYS THEN, TOO.
IF FOOD IS A FORM OF CURRENCY
OUT IN THE OPEN, THE INMATES SAY
IN THE UNDERGROUND, DRUGS FLOW
JUST AS FREELY.
ANYTHING YOU WANT, MARIJUANA,
COCAINE, HEROIN, WHATEVER.
Reporter: DRUGS GET
INTO THE PRISON MAINLY
DURING VISITATION.
A KISS COULD TRANSFER A BALLOON
OF COCAINE FROM THE VISITOR'S
MOUTH TO AN INMATE'S.
OTHERS TELL THEIR VISITORS
TO HOLLOW OUT THE THICK SOLES
OF THEIR SNEAKERS AND SEAL
THE DRUGS INSIDE THE SHOE.
THEN DURING VISITATION,
THEY SWAP SHOES.
WHERE DID YOU GET THIS FROM?
Reporter: STOLEN CLEANING
SPRAYS WHICH INMATES SNIFF TO
GET HIGH OR HOME MADE BREW KNOWN
AS BUCK MADE FROM FOOD AND YEAST
STOLEN FROM THE KITCHEN.
YOU DON'T BUY THIS FROM THE
CAN TEEN.
Reporter: WHERE DO THEY HIDE
IT WHILE IT BREWS?
USE YOUR HEAD.
THEY AIN'T CLIMBING UP THERE
TO LOOK.
Reporter: YOU CAN ALSO GET
HIGH WITH A POTENT MIXTURE
OF PEPPER AND OTHER SPICES,
WHICH THE INMATES SHAKE IN HOT
WATER AND DRINK.
Reporter: GET CAUGHT AND YOU
CAN GET SENT TO SEGREGATION FOR
SIX MONTHS.
THAT'S 23 HOURS A DAY IN THESE
CELLS.
UP HERE, THE INMATES ARE SO
AGGRESSIVE, THEY USE ANYTHING
FOR WEAPONS.
THIS ONE USED HIS OWN FEESCYS
AND EUROPEAN.
OFFICERS GET ATTACKED BY
INMATES.
I SEEN OTHER INMATES ATTACKED BY
I SEEN AN INCIDENT WHERE INMATES
TRIED TO RAPE OTHER INMATES.
Reporter: COLLIDE ROSS,
ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF THE
PRISON.
THEY DIDN'T OBEY THEIR
PARENTS OR POLICE OFFICERS.
AND SOMEHOW OR OTHER, PEOPLE
THINK WE SHOULD BE ABLE TO TURN
ALL THAT AROUND.
WE CAN'T PERFORM MIRACLES.
Reporter: AND ONE THING THAT
STRUCK US WAS HOW HARDENED THE
SEASONED INMATES WERE.
SEVERAL PRISONERS I TALKED WITH
SAID THEY FELT NO REMORSE FOR
THEIR CRIMES.
THIS ONE BURNED A HOUSE AND AS
THE PEOPLE FLED, SHOT AT THEM.
YOU CAN'T TAKE IT BACK.
Reporter: YEAH, BUT YOU CAN
FEEL SORRY.
AIN'T GOING TO CUT MY TIME.
Reporter: THIS ONE BEAT
A PIZZA DELIVERY MAN
UNCONSCIOUS.
I FEEL LIKE IT WAS A REAL
DUMB MISTAKE.
Reporter: DUMB?
JUST DUMB?
WAS IT CRUEL?
NAW.
I MEAN, I DON'T FEEL LIKE IT WAS
CRUEL BECAUSE I DONE SEEN PEOPLE
DO CRUELER THINGS.
Reporter: AND THE EXPERTS SAY
ANY KID WHO STARTS TO FEEL
REMORSE WILL FIND IT CUT OFF BY
ANGER IN THIS ENVIRONMENT.
TAKE A LOOK AT THIS 15-YEAR-OLD
KID WHOM WE MET TWO YEARS AGO
WHEN HE JUST ARRIVED AT THE
PRISON.
HE'D BEEN CONVICTED OF RAPE AND
VICIOUS ASSAULT.
BUT HE TOLD US BACK THEN HOW HE
MISSED HIS GRANDMOTHER AND
LONGED FOR THE SIMPLE JOY OF
FEELING RAIN ON HIS FACE.
FEEL SO GOOD, I AIN'T FELT
RAIN IN SO LONG.
Reporter: BUT TAKE A LOOK AT
HIM NOW.
YOU'VE SEEN HIM BEFORE IN THIS
REPORT.
TODAY, HE'S KNOWN AS ONE OF THE
MOST DANGEROUS PEOPLE IN THIS
PRISON.
SOMETIMES [ BLEEP ] JUST GRAB
SOMEBODY AND START CUTTING, YOU
KNOW, THAT TYPE OF THING, YOU
KNOW, JUST MAYBE FOR THE THRILL
OF IT.
I DON'T KNOW.
Reporter: WHICH BRINGS US
BACK TO OUR NEW JACKS, THE 15
YOUNG MEN WE WATCHED ARRIVE AT
THE WESTERN YOUTH INSTITUTION.
WE DECIDED TO CHECK BACK IN
AFTER TWO MONTHS TO SEE WHAT HAD
HAPPENED TO THEM.
EVEN THEY WE WERE TOLD THEY
WOULDN'T DARE TELL US
EVERYTHING.
REMEMBER MIKE LEGGETT, THE KID
WHO FIRST TALKED TOUGH BUT THEN
SEEMED NERVOUS?
TWO MONTHS LATER HE WAS STILL
TRYING TO GO IT ALONE WITHOUT
PROTECTION.
IT WASN'T EASY.
EIGHT GANG MEMBERS ATTACKED HIM
IN THE YARD.
THEN TWO OF THEM GRAB MY LEGS
AND DROPPED ME ON THE GROUND,
STARTED KICKING ME.
THEN SOME OTHER BOYS COME
AND JUMP IN.
Reporter: JAMES YOUNG HAD
A DIFFERENT KIND OF RUN-IN,
WITH A C.O.
AND HAD HIS EYES OPEN WHEN HE
WAS SENT TO SEGREGATION.
HE SAID THE OFFICERS UP THERE
USE THE MOST AGGRESSIVE INMATES
AS WEAPONS TO GET BACK AT OTHER
PRISONERS, EVEN THOUGH THEY'RE
SUPPOSED TO BE ISOLATED IN
SEPARATE CELLS.
IF YOU PISS
A C.O. OFF, YOU'RE IN TROUBLE.
MYSTERIOUSLY, SOMEBODY GETS OUT
OF A ROOM, BUT MYSTERIOUSLY,
YOUR DOOR POPS AND SO DOES
THEIRS, AND YOU HURTING.
Reporter: YOUNG SAYS HE'S
CONSTANTLY LOOKING
OVER HIS SHOULDER NOW.
BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW WHO'S
FIXING TO STAB ME, WHO'S FIXING
TO TRY AND CUT ME, WHO'S GOING
TO HIT ME OR WHAT.
Reporter: AND REMEMBER
THE GAY INMATE MARK HALL,
OR TASHA?
HE TOLD US PRISON LIFE WASN'T SO
TOUGH.
BUT ANOTHER INMATE SAID THE
TRUTH ABOUT TASHA IS HE WAS USED
BY A PROSTITUTE BY OTHERS WHO
TOOK A CUT OF THE PAY.
YOU WOULD SEE HIM GETTING IN
THE SHOWER WITH OTHER GUYS.
Reporter: WE CALLED TASHA TO
ASK ABOUT THIS.
HE TOLD US HE DID DO TRICKS, $30
EACH TIME, BUT SAID HE KEPT THE
MONEY FOR HIMSELF.
AND WHAT ABOUT OWEN FRANCIS, WHO
CRIED ABOUT HIS MOTHER'S ILLNESS
WHO HAD BEEN THREATENED
ON THE ELEVATOR?
HE SAID HE WAS ALL RIGHT.
BUT HE SEEMED WITHDRAWN.
I LEARNED THINGS HERE I AIN'T
NEVER KNEW BEFORE IN MY LIFE.
Reporter: HE TOLD US HE'D
BEEN TAUNTED WITH THREATS OF
RAPE AND INJURY, BUT HE REFUSED
PROTECTION, EVEN THOUGH IT WAS
OFFERED.
ONLY PERSON THAT TAKES CARE
OF ME IS GOD.
Reporter: SO WE LEFT THE
PRISON KNOWING THAT 15 NEW KIDS
WERE STILL FIGURING OUT HOW TO
SURVIVE, KNOWING SOME OF THEIR
STORIES WOULD NEVER BE TOLD.
NEW JACK JAMES YOUNG SAID THEY
ARE TRAPPED IN FEAR AND SILENCE.
HE TOLD US THERE WAS A BOY HE
WAS WORRIED ABOUT BUT COULDN'T
HELP.
AFTER TWO MONTHS, A BOY BEING
SOLD FOR SEX BY HIS PROTECTER.
I SEEN IT.
YOU KNOW, SOME PEOPLE BE PIMPING
HIM OUT TO GAY PEOPLE IN HERE.
I SAID I KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON.
NO, THERE AIN'T NOTHING GOING
ON.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT
IF HE DID TELL A C.O., THEN
THEY'D BEAT THE HELL OUT OF HIM
AND STILL PIMP HIM.
Reporter: WHATEVER HAPPENS
IN THE REST OF THEIR LIVES,
THE 15 ARRIVALS WHO CAME TO THIS
PRISON HAVE ONE MESSAGE
FOR OUTSIDERS, THE MESSAGE OWEN
FRANCIS GAVE WHEN WE ASKED HIM
WHAT HE WANTED OTHERS TO KNOW --
THIS IS NOT THE PLACE TO BE.
BY THE WAY, ONCE THESE KIDS
REACH 18, THEY'LL BE TRANSFERRED
TO AN ADULT FACILITY WHERE EVEN
MORE HARDENED CRIMINALS WILL BE
SETTING THE RULES.
SOMETHING ELSE, JUST TODAY,
AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL, WHICH USUALLY
CONCERNS ITSELF WITH HUMAN
RIGHTS ABUSES ABROAD, ISSUED
A REPORT ON CONDITIONS INSIDE
AMERICAN JAILS FOR JUVENILES.
IT SAID THAT INMATES ARE BEING
PHYSICALLY ABUSED AND STRIPPED
OF THEIR HUMAN DIGNITY.
AND THE REPORT REMINDED THAT
KIDS THAT ARE ONLY PUNISHED
AND NOT REHABILITATED WILL ONE